In this video, we are going to
learn about inter vlan routing,
which is how we can connecting
between pc in the different VLAN.
So all pc in all vlan should be
able to communicate each others.
To connecting between vlan like this, we will
need a router. So here let’s import a router,
go to network devices, and then
here let’s import router 2811.
Here we only need 1 router and we only need
to connecting this router to 1 switch.
We are free to connecting this router to any switch, we
can connecting the router to switch 1, switch 2,
or switch3. In this case I want to
connecting the router to switch 1.
Now let’s talk about the
address. In the previous video,
I have said that different vlan must be using
different network or different block subnet.
But here we still configure all vlan with
same block subnet, which is 192.168.1.x.
From now, we are going to use
different network for each vlan.
For example, for vlan 10, we are
going to use 192.168.10.0/24,
for vlan 20 we are going to use
192.168.20.0/24, and for vlan 30 we are
going to use 192.168.30.0/24. Okay, this is the
ip address that we are going to use for each vlan
Next, you need to remember that if pc want
to communicate with other pc in the different network,
the pc will need a gateway. Here
let’s go to the pc, dekstop, ip configuration,
and here we can see default gateway.
Once again, remember that if pc want
to communicate with others pc in the different
network, so the pc will need a default gateway.
But if pc want to communicate
with other pc in the same network,
the pc will not need default gateway.
For example here if pc in the vlan 10
want to communicate with others pc in the
vlan 10, so the pc not need default gateway.
But if pc in the vlan 10 want to communicate with
pc in the vlan 20, so the pc will need a gateway.
And who Is the gateway? The
gateway will be the router.
So here we need to configure an ip address
in the router to become gateway for all pc.
Okay let’s just start. Open the router,
go to CLI , here choose no, enable, and
then go to global configuration mode.
Next, here we can see that the light of
interface fa0/0 is still red, this is means
that the interface is still disable, let’s enable
this. Interface fa0/0, and then no shutdown.
Okay here we can see that now
the light is already green.
Next let’s configure the ip address in
the router to become gateway for all pc.
Let’s configure for vlan 1 first. For vlan
1, we will configure the ip address in fa0/0.
Here we already in fa0/0, so ip
address 192.168.1.1 255.255.255.0.
Okay now we have done configuring the
ip address in the router for vlan 1.
Next let’s configure the ip address for vlan 10.
For vlan 10, we will need to create sub interface.
So here let’s go to interface fa0/0.10. fa0/0
is the interface of router that connected to the switch,
and 10 means that we are going to
create sub interface 10. This will be for vlan 10
Next let’s type encapsulation dot1q 10.
This command is to define that interface
fa0/0.10 is for vlan 10.
Next let’s configure the ip address.
The ip address of vlan 10 is 192.168.10.1
and the subnetmask is 255.255.255.0.
Okay we have done for vlan 1 and vlan 10, next
let’s configure for vlan 20. Let’s create sub
interface for vlan 20, so interface fa0/0.20,
encapsulation dot1q 20. Remember that this command
is to define that interface fa0/0.20 is for vlan
20. And finally let’s configure the ip address.
The ip address for vlan 20 is 192.168.20.1
and the subnetmask is 255.255.255.0
Okay, last let’s configure the ip address for vlan
30. Interface fa0/0.30, encapsulation dot1q 30
and then ip address 192.168.30.1 255.255.255.0.
Okay now we have done configuring the ip address
of router for all vlan. To verify, we can
use command do show ip interface brief.
Here we can see that we already have
ip address for vlan 1, 10, 20 and 30.
Next, we need to configure trunk in the
switch interface that connected to the router.
In this case the interface is fa0/8. Why
this interface should configured as trunk?
This is because when different vlan
want to communicate each others,
the communication will go through the router.
For example vlan 10 want to communicate with
vlan 20, so the packet from vlan
10 will be sent to the switch,
from switch to the router, from the router
back to the switch and finally go to vlan 20.
This is why we need to configure fa0/8
as trunk. So this interface will
able to pass packet from any vlan.
Okay let’s configure it.
Enable,
configure terminal. Go to interface
fa0/8, and then switchport mode trunk.
Let’s verify it, do show interface trunk. Okay
here we can see that now we have 2 trunk,
which is the interface that connected to the router,
and the interface that connected to the switch 2.
Okay now we have done configuring inter
vlan routing, now all vlan should be able
to communicate each others. We are going
to doing a testing in the next video.
So thankyou for watching and
see you on the next video